Okay, we've just made our first gather,
and it's time to make the second gather.
But there are a couple of things to
consider before you go into a tank for a
second time, most of which concern the
support that you're going to get from
that first bubble you made. Now, if you
blew your glass out very, very thin, that
glass is going to heat up very fast when
you put that second gather of glass on
it, and it's going to want to collapse.
But if the bubble is too thick, it's
going to be very cold, and it's probably
not going to heat evenly, and the second
gather is going to blow out unevenly. So
you need to strike a balance between
temperature and thickness. And in
general, I like to blow a first gather
out so the bubble's about an inch, maybe
an inch and a quarter in diameter, and
the piece has lost most of its glow,
which it's almost done here. So I'm going
to wait another couple of seconds before
I get that second gather. Now, to make a
second gather, you do it just like the
first, except you won't have as much
trouble seeing the glass this time. You
should know where it is by now.
So here we go with the actual second
gather itself. I've got the first gather
nice and cool on the end of the blowpipe,
and as I go into the tank, as always, I'm
going to keep that pipe rotating so it
doesn't stick to the wall or sill of the
tank. Rest it on the sill, rotate it up
against that white wall, and dip it into
the glass. Now it's easier to find the
glass, this time because I know where it
is. Line up those moiles,
push a little bit forward to gather glass
onto the tip, and break the strand off.
Notice how slowly I'm turning the pipe,
just at the rate that the glass wants to
fall. And there's the second gather.
A push gather is useful if you're trying
to maximize the amount of glass you get
out of the furnace in one shot. Notice
I'm holding the pipe up at a high angle.
So to do a push, you start like a regular
gather and push into the glass, sort of
shoveling it onto the end as you turn
very fast.
Now it's a little hard to balance, so you
may want to let some of that glass run
back onto the moile for stability.
And that's what a push gather looks like.
You get about one and a half times as
much glass as you normally would.
A pull gather is sort of the opposite of
a push gather. You use this when you want
only a very small amount of glass on the
pipe. Now ideally, you put the pipe in at
a very high angle, but if I do that in
this photo, you won't be able to see
what's going on. So I'm going to use a
little bit lower angle than you would
normally use. It begins the same, you get
the glass on the end of the pipe, and
instead of pushing or remaining still,
you pull back and hold the pipe down.
That allows the extra glass to fall off
the end, and then you come up level to
break the strand.
And that's the amount of glass you get
from a pull gather, about half as much as
a normal gather.
A double dip or double gather is a way of
getting the maximum amount of glass out
on the first gather. Now this only works
on a first gather. What you're going to
do is basically put two gathers on top of
each other right in a row. So we begin by
making a normal first gather. This is
just a standard first gather, maybe
pushing a little bit forward to get a
little bit more glass. And then I'm just
going to come out here for just a second
and let that glass cool. Now it's not
cooling very much because as you can see
it's still in the furnace. You can let
this cool outside the furnace, but I'm
just going to keep it on camera here. And
after a couple of seconds, it chills up,
and I can go in for a second layer, and I
align those moiles on that second layer
and push a little bit on that second
layer as it's going on, break off the
strand, and now I've retrieved basically
double the amount of glass that I would
normally get on a gather. You can also
see I get a couple of bubbles.